International pressure
is clearly building
on both Israel and Hamas
to return to negotiations
to end the war in Gaza
and to release the remaining hostages.
This new push, underscored
by a grave global concern
right now, that the region,
this region in the Middle East
where I am,
is inching closer
and closer to the threat
of a much wider scale conflict.
Israel is bracing for strikes
from Iran and its heavily armed proxies
after it killed Hezbollah
and Hamas leaders just last week.
The source familiar
with the discussions
tells CNN that the talks are scheduled.
The mediator talks are scheduled
for next Thursday, August 15th.
The Israeli Prime
Minister's office says
Israel will send the negotiations
team to the talks.
The U.S.,
Qatar and Egypt
have issued this joint statement.
They're leading this effort,
the trio of mediators say.
And I'm quoting now,
there is no further time to waste,
nor excuses from any party
for further delay.
It is time to release the hostages, begin
the cease fire and implement
this agreement.
That's the end of the quote
from those three mediators.
Let's dig deeper right now.
Joining us, Leon Panetta.
He served as U.S.
defense secretary
and CIA director under President Obama.
Mr. Secretary.
Always good to have you join us
here on CNN. Thanks very much.
And as you heard that,
as, you know, Egypt,
Israel and cutter,
they want both Israel and Hamas to resume
cease fire and hostage negotiations
this coming week.
In your opinion, Mr.
Secretary, how likely is that to happen?
Well, one thing we know for sure,
and you're there, Wolf, is that
this is a very dangerous moment,
in which,
without question, if,
the wrong steps are taken
by Iran and Hezbollah,
we can have a larger war on our hands.
on the other hand, because, there are
a number of nations,
that you mentioned that are working,
diplomatically to try to get, Iran
and Hezbollah and others to back down,
and hopefully be able to engage,
in negotiations,
get back to the negotiating table.
I'm,
I'm sure that it's having some impact.
but right now,
I think the situation is one
that is a crisis situation.
And I think that I worry,
frankly, that,
that this could result
in an escalated war.
There.
Yeah.
All of us
are worried about that possibility,
especially those of us
who are here in the region.
Mr.
Secretary, the Biden administration
says it will defend Israel
if it comes under attack.
What should the Biden administration
be doing right now,
do you think,
to potentially not further inflame
the regional tensions that are underway?
Well, look, I think
the most important thing
that the United States is doing right now
is deploying our military capabilities
to the region
in order to make sure
that we have in place
everything we need in order to defend
against airstrikes in Israel.
you know, Iran crossed the line,
in April in sending,
almost 300 missiles into Israel itself.
Unfortunately, because,
our allies, Israel,
others were able to knock down
a lot of those missiles,
almost 90% of those missiles.
what happened
did not escalate the situation there.
Whether or not that can happen again,
I think is
what what we're all looking at.
but having the United States
having the time
to be able
to deploy our destroyers, to deploy our,
our air capabilities there as well,
and to prepare for that possibility
is probably the most important thing
that the United States can do right now
and also hopefully urge Israel
and the parties
to get back to the negotiating table.
You were the U.S.
defense secretary.
You know the region well.
You know the issues, very, very closely.
how would you be handling
what's going on right now
if you were still the defense secretary?
And I asked the question specifically
because Israel is now
a member of the U.S.
military's Central Command,
which is in charge of the whole
Middle East, as opposed to
when you were defense secretary
as part of the European Command.
What's the what?
What does that
what what does that suggest to you
about the potential difference?
Well, what it what it means
is that there's, a larger direct focus,
on Israel and, on Israel's enemies.
and that means that,
the United States
plays a much more important role in terms
of trying to defend Israel.
and that's that's as it should be.
the issue then becomes,
if in fact, Iran or the proxies
decide to conduct a massive attack,
in which,
a lot of innocent Israelis are killed.
it leaves the United States
very little option
but to go in and help defend Israel
in that kind of war.
And not just with, military equipment,
but with troops as well.
Is that what you're saying?
Well, you know,
you'd like to believe that,
we could provide
the military capabilities
as we have been.
in order to be able to ensure
that Israel,
can do the fighting
and do the fighting effectively,
I think we'll try to exhaust that option.
But when you're in an escalated war,
everything is on the table.
Yeah, that's what I'm hearing as well.
let me return
to the Israeli prime
minister, Benjamin Netanyahu.
he gave an exclusive
interview to time magazine.
Mr.
Secretary, and Netanyahu,
pushes back against claims that he's,
drawing out the Gaza campaign
to ensure that he remains
in political office.
He calls that accusation against him
a canard.
Do you feel that Prime Minister
Netanyahu has resisted
a cease fire deal
for personal political reasons,
as some are alleging?
You know, I, I've known,
Netanyahu for a long time,
going back to the Clinton administration.
he's he's committed to two things.
He's committed to the survival of Israel,
but he's also committed
to his own survival in office.
and that combination,
means that while he's a fighter,
he's not much of a peacemaker.
And that is the Netanyahu
that we're dealing with now.
In that same time magazine interview,
Netanyahu was asked
about the humanitarian crisis in Gaza.
He denied that Israel has failed
to do enough
to aid civilians,
saying this, and I'm quoting him now.
We've gone out of our way
to enable humanitarian assistance
since the beginning of the war.
Clearly, the Biden administration, Mr.
Secretary, doesn't necessarily agree
with his assessment. Do you?
Well, I you know, I
not Netanyahu sees the situation
through his eyes.
and, that's not necessarily
what's really happening.
you know, he he will
he will make the case that somehow,
Israel bears
no responsibility
for the humanitarian crisis, in Gaza.
but that's not the
that's not really the facts.
anybody who's been there,
anybody who's seen
that situation, knows very well that,
yeah, Israel is
obviously focused on fighting a war,
and not really doing very much
with regards to humanitarian assistance.
and so, right now,
the continuing fighting in Gaza, the,
the threat of an even larger war
with Iran, and its proxies.
I think I think what you're going to see
is a very hard line.
Netanyahu,
trying to confront a very hard line.
Iran.
Would you be surprised, Mr.
Secretary?
if Israel launched a preemptive strike
right now
against his Hezbollah
forces in Lebanon for, for example,
and maybe even against
Iranian forces inside Iran?
Well, I'm sure that kind of thinking
is on the table.
If they if they determined
that they have intelligence
on a potential attack against Israel,
my sense would be that they would take
the opportunity,
to, to
to do a precipitous attack
in order to stop,
that kind of, of confrontation.
So, yeah,
I think they're looking at all
the options right now.
but clearly what is happening
now is that it's a wait and see game.
to determine just whether or not,
Iran and Hezbollah
are going to take a major step
that will, in fact, escalate the war.
look, the record here is that
everybody is pushing now to try to
to try to hopefully reduce the chances
for that kind of escalation
that's worked in the past.
I think the hope is that it can work now.
Let's hope it does.
Leon Panetta,
the former defense secretary,
former CIA director, as usual,
thank you very much for your analysis.
We appreciate it.